title: Transsphenoidal pituitary surgery via the endoscopic technique: results in 35 consecutive patients with Cushing's disease.
authors: R.T. Netea-Maier, E.J. van Lindert, M. den Heijer, A. van der Eerden, G.F.F.M. Pieters, C.G.J. Sweep, J.A. Grotenhuis and A.R.M.M. Hermus
has_pdf: False
template: publication
bibkey: nete06
published_in: European journal of endocrinology
pub_details: <i>European journal of endocrinology</i> 2006;154:675-684
doi: https://doi.org/10.1530/eje.1.02133
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16645014
The endoscopic technique has been recently introduced in the field of transsphenoidal pituitary surgery. This technique allows inspection of sellar, supra- and parasellar structures and removal of the tumor under direct visualization, is minimally traumatic and permits easier reoperations. This is the first report on the results of endoscopic surgery for patients with Cushing's disease. Our aim was to retrospectively analyze the results of pituitary surgery in 35 consecutive patients with Cushing's disease operated in our hospital after the introduction of the endoscopic technique (1998-2004). Remission was defined as suppression of plasma cortisol (< or =50 nmol/L) after 1 mg dexamethasone overnight determined in the first 3 months after surgery and disappearance of clinical signs and symptoms of hypercortisolism. The patients were followed for an average of 27 months (range 4 to 81 months, median 20 months). Pituitary MRI showed a macroadenoma in 6 patients, a microadenoma in 17 patients and no adenoma in 12 patients. After the initial surgery 27 patients (77%) were in remission. None of the patients had a relapse during follow-up. In the remaining 8 patients hypercortisolemia persisted after surgery. Three of them had a second endoscopic pituitary surgery resulting in remission in two patients. In one patient a second endoscopic pituitary surgery will soon follow. The remaining four patients were treated with radiotherapy postoperatively. Two of them were at the time of data collection in remission. One patient from the remission group had a serious epistaxis and three patients had cerebrospinal fluid leakage, one requiring an external lumbar drain, shortly after surgery. No complications were recorded in the failure group. Postoperatively 34% of all patients required substitution with levothyroxine, 40% required substitution with glucocorticoids, 17% received estrogens or testosterone and 6% still required desmopressin. Endoscopic transsphenoidal pituitary surgery resulted in our series of patients with Cushings disease in an excellent postoperative remission rate. A randomized clinical trial, comparing endoscopic and conventional pituitary surgery in patients with Cushings disease, is needed to determine the pros and cons of both techniques.

