title: AI-assisted detection of endometrium (pre)malignancies in endometrium pipelle biopsies
groups: ai-for-health
finished: false
type: student
picture: 
template: project-single
people: Thijs Gelton, Sanne Vermorgen, Francesco Ciompi
description: Development of a AI-assisted detection model of endometrium (pre)malignancies in endometrium pipelle biopsies

**Start date: 01-02-2021** <br>
**End date: 01-07-2022**

## Clinical Problem
Endometrial cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies in women. Each year, 2000 women are diagnosed with endometrial cancer (EC) in the Netherlands. The disease is most frequent in postmenopausal women, with a mean age of 65 year at the time of diagnosis. An increased thickness of the endometrium and abnormal vaginal blood loss are often the first signs of the development of endometrium cancer. Sometimes, precancerous tissue (premalignancy) can be detected, and early treatment of this premalignancy can prevent the ultimate development of cancer, thus preventing the morbidity and morbidity related to endometrial cancer. 
Routinely, postmenopausal women present with abnormal vaginal blood loss or screening for Lynch syndrome (increased risk of EC), will be subjected to endometrial / pipelle biopsy. This sample is analysed by the pathologist for evaluation of (pre)malignancy. This minimally invasive procedure is part of routine practice with limited discomfort for the patient. 
The histopathologic evaluation of the endometrium sample guides further management of the patient. If the biopsy is benign, the patient will not receive further diagnostic work-up or treatment, unless the symptoms persist for six months. If the biopsy is premalignant or malignant, treatment will be initiated. A correct evaluation of the biopsy specimen is therefore of paramount importance.
Each week, approximately 10 endometrial biopsies are processed in the Pathology Department of Radboudumc, resulting in approximately 500 samples per year. Overall, the risk of (pre)malignancy is only 5-10% illustrating the large amount of work that is part of everyday practice in the Radboudumc. This also reflects clinical practice in smaller Pathology laboratories throughout the Netherlands and worldwide, with substantial amounts of endometrium pipelle biopsies on a daily basis. The evaluation of these specimens is thus a substantial part of the workload for gynaecologic pathologists. Added to this, the correct diagnosis of premalignancies is often difficult and sometimes requires a consensus opinion. 
For both the gynaecologists and the pathologists, efficient and correct evaluation of pipelle biopsies of the endometrium is of vital importance. In order to optimize both the efficiency and the accuracy of the diagnostic process, we plan to develop  artificial intelligence (AI) tools  to pre-screen the pipelle biopsy specimens and separate the benign samples from the potentially premalignant or malignant samples, alerting the pathologist to pay extra attention on this last category.
Because of the large quantities of endometrium pipelle biopsies and the importance of the diagnostic work-up of these biopsies for the patient, the gynecologist and the pathologist, we consider endometrium pipelle biopsies as an interesting specimen for the development of a routinely useful AI algorithm platform with a near 100% sensitivity for the detection of endometrium (pre)malignancies. To the best of our knowledge, AI applications for automated screening of endometrium pipelle has not been addressed yet.

## Solution
This project will be developed in synergy by an AI master student (Thijs Gelton) and a resident pathology (Sanne Vermorgen) at Radboudumc, under the supervision of experts in computational pathology (Francesco Ciompi, Jeroen van der Laak), gynecopathology (Michiel Simons, Hans Bulten) and gynecologist oncology (Hanny Pijnenborg). 
In this project, we will develop an AI algorithm to process a digital pathology slide (whole-slide image, WSI) of endometrium pipelle tissue sample and automatically produce an interpretable prediction of the class this sample belongs to, among the four clinically relevant categories defined in this project. The approach will combine detailed manual annotations in a subset of selected cases, and weak labels from a large bulk of retrospective cases to make a prediction at case level, also providing a visual output that can be inspected by pathologists in a pathology viewer. AI techniques of whole-slide image classification based both on tissue segmentation / detection and on end-to-end learning from WSI data will be developed. The final algorithm will be made available for research purpose both as open-source code and as an application on the grand-challenge.org platform, which will allow pathologists to upload new slides of endometrial pipelles and get the result automatically.

## Data
In this project, we will include all Radboudumc archival endometrial pipelles processed between October 2013 and December 2021, resulting in a total of about  3900 cases. From this set, we will select representative examples of the four main clinically relevant categories that will be addressed in this project, namely 1) normal endometrium, 2) endometrial hyperplasia without atypia, 3) endometrial hyperplasia with atypia and 4) endometrial carcinoma. On this set, pathologists will make manual annotations of relevant regions, which will be used for training and validation of AI algorithms. For training purposes, about 100 fully anonymized cases will be annotated with manual dense annotations of tissue types, while the rest of cases will be annotated with weak annotations extracted from the pathology reports. Manual annotations will be performed during the month of January 2022, to make sure that a complete training set is available by the start of the project, on February 1, 2022. Finally, the validation of developed algorithms will be performed on > 3,000 cases. For these cases, no manual annotations are needed, as the diagnostic label extracted from the pathology report will be used as a target. These cases will likely be pseudonymized, to be able to follow up patients in the future.

## Innovation
The main result of this project will be an AI algorithm for the detection and classification of cancer in endometrium pipelles. Such a system does not exist in clinical routine, and will be one of the first at international level. We will provide access to this algorithms via the grand-challenge.org platform, with an algorithm release at the end of this project, as well as via integration in the digital pathology workflow of Radboudumc. The latter will be achieved through an ongoing collaboration with the Swedish company SECTRA, provider of the digital pathology workflow at Radboudumc, the first algorithms has been integrated (mitosis detection) and more algorithms, including this one, will be integrated in the near future.
