title: Research
template: research
groups_description: Imaging is a cornerstone of modern medicine. The amount of imaging that is performed is growing, the number of modalities is growing, and the resolution and dimensionality of the scans is increasing. Our research focuses on creating software to let computers help physicians in the image interpretation process. Thanks to <a href="/publications/litj17/">deep learning</a>, we are increasingly able to rapidly build AI applications that rival or surpass the capabilities of human doctors. We expect this will have a profound impact on healthcare.<br><br>We have research lines in radiology that focus on chest imaging with CT and x-ray, on pelvic imaging with MRI, and on musculoskeletal imaging, in pathology that address current diagnostic processes and the development of new image-based biomarkers that predict patient outcome and therapy response. We also work in radiotherapy and ophthalmology. We have widened our focus further in the Radboud AI for Health lab that also addresses text analysis, applications in dentistry and research on implementation and validation of AI.<br><br>
support_description: To perform world-leading machine learning research and translate the results of our projects from the lab to the patient, we need a team of research software engineers and state-of-the-art hardware facilities. We have grouped our infrastructure and research support in the <a href="http://rtc.diagnijmegen.nl/">Radboud Technology Center Deep Learning</a>, one of <a href="https://www.radboudumc.nl/en/research/technology-centers">19 research facilities in Radboudumc</a>. The <a href="http://rtc.diagnijmegen.nl/">RTC AI</a> consists of a growing team of experts on deep learning experimentation and research software engineering that maintains our GPU compute cluster <a href="https://rtc.diagnijmegen.nl/software/sol/">Sol</a>, maintains and develops our biomedical software platform <a href="https://grand-challenge.org/">grand-challenge.org</a>, and supports the Radboud AI for Health lab.<br><br>
spinoff_description: Several innovations from our research have led to successful spin-off companies that bring cutting-edge AI solutions into clinical practice. These companies translate our scientific discoveries into real-world applications, enhancing patient care and supporting healthcare professionals worldwide.<br><br>
industry_description: DIAG actively collaborates with industry partners to accelerate the development, validation, and implementation of AI technologies in medical imaging. These partnerships help bridge the gap between academic research and clinical deployment, ensuring our innovations have real-world impact.<br><br>
research_lines_description: Click on any of the cards below to learn more about the research lines in DIAG.
