title: Contribution of histopathologic Tissue composition to Quantitative MR spectroscopy and Diffusion-weighted imaging of the Prostate
authors: T. Kobus, J.A.W.M. van der Laak, M.C. Maas, T. Hambrock, C.C. Bruggink, C.A.H. de Kaa, T.W.J. Scheenen and A. Heerschap
has_pdf: False
template: publication
bibkey: kobus2016
published_in: Radiology
pub_details: <i>Radiology</i> 2016;278(3):801-811
doi: https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2015142889
To determine associations of metabolite levels derived from magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopic imaging (ie, hydrogen 1 [1H] MR spectroscopic imaging) and apparent diffusion coefficients (ADCs) from diffusion-weighted imaging with prostate tissue composition assessed by digital image analysis of histologic sections. Materials and Methods: Institutional ethical review board approved this retrospective study and waived informed consent. Fifty-seven prostate cancer patients underwent an MR examination followed by prostatectomy. One hematoxylin and eosin–stained section of the resected prostate per patient was digitized and computationally segmented into nuclei, lumen, and combination of epithelial cytoplasm and stroma. On each stained section, regions of interest (ROIs) were chosen and matched to the corresponding ADC map and 1H MR spectroscopic imaging voxels. ADC and two metabolite ratios (citrate [Cit], spermine [Spm], and creatine [Cr] to choline [Cho] and Cho to Cr plus Spm) were correlated with percentage areas of nuclei, lumen, and cytoplasm and stroma for peripheral zone (PZ), transition zone (TZ), and tumor tissue in both zones of the prostate by using a linear mixed-effect model and Spearman correlation coefficient (r). Results: ADC and (Cit + Spm + Cr)/Cho ratio showed positive correlation with percentage area of lumen (r = 0.43 and 0.50, respectively) and negative correlation with percentage area of nuclei (r = 20.29 and 20.26, respectively). The Cho/(Cr + Spm) ratio showed negative association with percentage area of lumen (r = 20.40) and positive association with area of nuclei (r = 0.26). Percentage areas of lumen and nuclei, (Cit + Spm + Cr)/Cho ratio, and ADC were significantly different (P , .001) between benign PZ (23.7 and 7.7, 8.83, and 1.58 3 1023 mm2/sec, respectively) and tumor PZ tissue (11.4 and 12.5, 5.13, and 1.20 3 1023 mm2/ sec, respectively). These parameters were also significantly different between benign TZ (20.0 and 8.2, 6.50, and 1.26 3 1023 mm2/sec, respectively) and tumor TZ tissue (9.8 and 11.2, 4.36, and 1.03 3 1023 mm2/sec, respectively). Conclusion: The observed correlation of (Cit + Spm + Cr)/Cho ratio and ADC of the prostate with its tissue composition indicates that components of this composition, such as percentage luminal area, contribute to the value of these MR parameters.

