title: a7 Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonist GTS-21 attenuates ventilator-induced tumour necrosis factor-a production and lung injury
authors: M. Kox, J.C. Pompe, E. Peters,  Vaneker M., J.W. van der Laak, J.G. van der Hoeven, G.J. Scheffer, C.W. Hoedemaekers and P. Pickkers
has_pdf: True
template: publication
bibkey: kox11
published_in: British Journal of Anaesthesia
pub_details: <i>British Journal of Anaesthesia</i> 2011;107(4):559-566
doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aer202
Background. Mechanical ventilation (MV) induces an inﬂammatory response that can lead to lung injury. The vagus nerve can limit the inﬂammatory response through the cholinergic anti-inﬂammatory pathway. We evaluated the effects of stimulation of the cholinergic antiinﬂammatory pathway with the selective partial a7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (a7nAChR) agonist GTS-21 on inﬂammation and lung injury induced by MV using clinically relevant ventilator settings. Furthermore, we investigated whether altering endogenous cholinergic signalling, by administration of the non-speciﬁc nAChR antagonist mecamylamine and the peripherally acting acetylcholinesterase inhibitor neostigmine, modulates the MV-induced inﬂammatory response. Methods. C57BL6 mice were injected i.p. with either the selective a7nAChR agonist GTS-21 (8 mg kg21), the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor neostigmine (80 mg kg21), the nAChR antagonist mecamylamine (1 mg kg21), or a placebo; followed by 4 h of MV (8 ml kg21, 1.5 cm H2O PEEP). Results. MV resulted in release of cytokines in plasma and lungs compared with unventilated mice. Lung and plasma levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a, but not of interleukin-10, were lower in GTS-21-treated animals compared with placebo (P,0.05). In addition, GTS-21 lowered the alveolar–arterial gradient, indicating improved lung function (P¼0.04). Neither neostigmine nor mecamylamine had an effect on MV-induced inﬂammation or lung function. Conclusions. MV with clinically relevant ventilator settings results in pulmonary and systemic inﬂammation. Stimulation of the cholinergic anti-inﬂammatory pathway with GTS-21 attenuates MV-induced release of TNF-a, which was associated with reduced lung injury. Modulation of endogenous cholinergic signalling did not affect the MV-induced inﬂammatory response. Selective stimulation of the cholinergic anti-inﬂammatory pathway may represent new treatment options for MV-induced lung injury. 

