title: A survey by the European Society of Breast Imaging on the utilisation of breast MRI in clinical practice.
authors: P. Clauser, R. Mann, A. Athanasiou, H. Prosch, K. Pinker, M. Dietzel, T.H. Helbich, M. Fuchsjäger, J. Camps-Herrero, F. Sardanelli, G. Forrai and P.A.T. Baltzer
has_pdf: False
template: publication
bibkey: clau18
published_in: European radiology
pub_details: <i>European radiology</i> 2018;28:1909-1918
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-017-5121-4
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29168005
While magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is considered a helpful diagnostic tool in breast imaging, discussions are ongoing about appropriate protocols and indications. The European Society of Breast Imaging (EUSOBI) launched a survey to evaluate the utilisation of breast MRI in clinical practice. An online survey reviewed by the EUSOBI board and committees was distributed amongst members. The questions encompassed: training and experience; annual breast MRI and MRI-guided-intervention workload; examination protocols; indications; reporting habits and preferences. Data were summarised and subgroups compared using χ  test. Of 647 EUSOBI members, 177 (27.4%) answered the survey. The majority were radiologists (90.5%), half of them based in academic centres (51.9%). Common indications for MRI included cancer staging, treatment monitoring, high-risk screening and problem-solving, and differed significantly between countries (p≤0.03). Structured reporting and BI-RADS were mostly used. Breast radiologists with ≤10 years of experience preferred inclusion of additional techniques, such as T2/STIR (p=0.03) and DWI (p=0.08) in the scan protocol. MRI-guided interventions were performed by a minority of participants (35.4%). The utilisation of breast MRI in clinical practice is generally in line with international recommendations. There are substantial differences between countries. MRI-guided interventions and functional MRI parameters are not widely available. • MRI is commonly used for the detection and characterisation of breast lesions. • Clinical practice standards are generally in line with current recommendations. • Standardised criteria and diagnostic categories (mainly BI-RADS) are widely adopted. • Younger radiologists value additional techniques, such as T2/STIR and DWI. • MRI-guided breast biopsy is not widely available.

