title: Position paper on screening for breast cancer by the European Society of Breast Imaging (EUSOBI) and 30 national breast radiology bodies from Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Israel, Lithuania, Moldova, The Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey.
authors: F. Sardanelli, H.S. Aase, M. Álvarez, E. Azavedo, H.J. Baarslag, C. Balleyguier, P.A. Baltzer, V. Beslagic, U. Bick, D. Bogdanovic-Stojanovic, R. Briediene, B. Brkljacic, J. Camps Herrero, C. Colin, E. Cornford, J. Danes, G. de Geer, G. Esen, A. Evans, M.H. Fuchsjaeger, F.J. Gilbert, O. Graf, G. Hargaden, T.H. Helbich, S.H. Heywang-Köbrunner, V. Ivanov, Á. Jónsson, C.K. Kuhl, E.C. Lisencu, E. Luczynska, R.M. Mann, J.C. Marques, L. Martincich, M. Mortier, M. Müller-Schimpfle, K. Ormandi, P. Panizza, F. Pediconi, R.M. Pijnappel, K. Pinker, T. Rissanen, N. Rotaru, G. Saguatti, T. Sella, J. Slobodníková, M. Talk, P. Taourel, R.M. Trimboli, I. Vejborg, A. Vourtsis and G. Forrai
has_pdf: False
template: publication
bibkey: sard17
published_in: European radiology
pub_details: <i>European radiology</i> 2017;27:2737-2743
doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-016-4612-z
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27807699
EUSOBI and 30 national breast radiology bodies support mammography for population-based screening, demonstrated to reduce breast cancer (BC) mortality and treatment impact. According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, the reduction in mortality is 40 % for women aged 50-69 years taking up the invitation while the probability of false-positive needle biopsy is <1 % per round and overdiagnosis is only 1-10 % for a 20-year screening. Mortality reduction was also observed for the age groups 40-49 years and 70-74 years, although with "limited evidence". Thus, we firstly recommend biennial screening mammography for average-risk women aged 50-69 years; extension up to 73 or 75 years, biennially, is a second priority, from 40-45 to 49 years, annually, a third priority. Screening with thermography or other optical tools as alternatives to mammography is discouraged. Preference should be given to population screening programmes on a territorial basis, with double reading. Adoption of digital mammography (not film-screen or phosphor-plate computer radiography) is a priority, which also improves sensitivity in dense breasts. Radiologists qualified as screening readers should be involved in programmes. Digital breast tomosynthesis is also set to become "routine mammography" in the screening setting in the next future. Dedicated pathways for high-risk women offering breast MRI according to national or international guidelines and recommendations are encouraged. • EUSOBI and 30 national breast radiology bodies support screening mammography. • A first priority is double-reading biennial mammography for women aged 50-69 years. • Extension to 73-75 and from 40-45 to 49 years is also encouraged. • Digital mammography (not film-screen or computer radiography) should be used. • DBT is set to become "routine mammography" in the screening setting in the next future.

