title: Automated pre-selection of mammograms without abnormalities using deep learning
authors: J. Teuwen, M. Kallenberg, A. Gubern-Merida, A. Rodriguez-Ruiz, N. Karssemeijer and R. Mann
has_pdf: False
template: publication
bibkey: teuw17b
published_in: Annual Meeting of the Radiological Society of North America
pub_details: in: <i>Annual Meeting of the Radiological Society of North America</i>, 2017
PURPOSE In this study we evaluated the potential of a computer system to select exams with low likelihood of containing cancer.  METHOD AND MATERIALS We collected a representative set of 1649 referrals with different screening outcome from the Dutch breast cancer screening. The dataset comprised 489 true positives (TP) exams and 1160 false positive (FP) exams. In addition, we collected 1000 true negative (TN) exams from the same screening population. All exams were automatically analyzed with Transpara v1.2.0 (ScreenPoint Medical, Nijmegen, The Netherlands). Transpara uses deep learning algorithms to, based on soft-tissue lesions and calcifications findings, categorize every mammogram on a 10-point scale. This computerized score represents the likelihood that a cancer is present in the exam at hand, where 10 represents the highest likelihood that a cancer is present. It is defined in such a way that, in a screening setting, the number of mammograms in each category is roughly equal.  In this study, we determined the distribution of the computerized cancer likelihood scores for the TP, FP and TN exams. In particular we quantified for each category the fraction of cases with a cancer likelihood score below or equal to 5, including about 50% of the mammograms. Additionally we evaluated the positive predictive value (PPV) of referrals in each likelihood category.  RESULTS 5.11% of the TPs, 20.3% of the FPs and 45.0% of the TNs were assigned to the likelihood categories 1 to 5. This corresponds to 0.7 cancers per 1000 in the group with score 1-5 and 11.2 per 1000 with a score higher than 5, based on the cancer detection rate of 6.5/1000 in the Dutch screening program. The PPV was 8.00%, 8.14%, and 44.9% for cancer likelihood scores 1, 5 and 10, respectively.  CONCLUSION Automated identification of a fraction of screening mammograms that most likely are normal is feasible.

