title: Surveillance of Women with the BRCA1 or BRCA2 Mutation by Using Biannual Automated Breast US, MR Imaging, and Mammography
authors: J.C.M. van Zelst, R.D.M. Mus, G. Woldringh, M.J.C.M. Rutten, P. Bult, S. Vreemann, M. de Jong, N. Karssemeijer, N. Hoogerbrugge and R.M. Mann
has_pdf: True
template: publication
bibkey: zels17b
published_in: Radiology
pub_details: <i>Radiology</i> 2017;285:376-388
doi: https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2017161218
pmid: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28609204
Purpose To evaluate a multimodal surveillance regimen including yearly full-field digital (FFD) mammography, dynamic contrast agent-enhanced (DCE) magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, and biannual automated breast (AB) ultrasonography (US) in women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. Materials and Methods This prospective multicenter trial enrolled 296 carriers of the BRCA mutation (153 BRCA1 and 128 BRCA2 carriers, and 15 women with first-degree untested relatives) between September 2010 and November 2012, with follow-up until November 2015. Participants underwent 2 years of intensified surveillance including biannual AB US, and routine yearly DCE MR imaging and FFD mammography. The surveillance performance for each modality and possible combinations were determined. Results Breast cancer was screening-detected in 16 women (age range, 33-58 years). Three interval cancers were detected by self-examination, all in carriers of the BRCA1 mutation under age 43 years. One cancer was detected in a carrier of the BRCA1 mutation with a palpable abnormality in the contralateral breast. One incidental breast cancer was detected in a prophylactic mastectomy specimen. Respectively, sensitivity of DCE MR imaging, FFD mammography, and AB US was 68.1% (14 of 21; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 42.9%, 85.8%), 37.2% (eight of 21; 95% CI: 19.8%, 58.7%), and 32.1% (seven of 21; 95% CI: 16.1%, 53.8%); specificity was 95.0% (643 of 682; 95% CI: 92.7%, 96.5%), 98.1% (638 of 652; 95% CI: 96.7%, 98.9%), and 95.1% (1030 of 1088; 95% CI: 93.5%, 96.3%); cancer detection rate was 2.0% (14 of 702), 1.2% (eight of 671), and 1.0% (seven of 711) per 100 women-years; and positive predictive value was 25.2% (14 of 54), 33.7% (nine of 23), and 9.5% (seven of 68). DCE MR imaging and FFD mammography combined yielded the highest sensitivity of 76.3% (16 of 21; 95% CI: 53.8%, 89.9%) and specificity of 93.6% (643 of 691; 95% CI: 91.3%, 95.3%). AB US did not depict additional cancers. FFD mammography yielded no additional cancers in women younger than 43 years, the mean age at diagnosis. In carriers of the BRCA2 mutation, sensitivity of FFD mammography with DCE MR imaging surveillance was 90.9% (10 of 11; 95% CI: 72.7%, 100%) and 60.0% (six of 10; 95% CI: 30.0%, 90.0%) in carriers of the BRCA1 mutation because of the high interval cancer rate in carriers of the BRCA1 mutation. Conclusion AB US may not be of added value to yearly FFD mammography and DCE MR imaging surveillance of carriers of the BRCA mutation. Study results suggest that carriers of the BRCA mutation younger than 40 years may not benefit from FFD mammography surveillance in addition to DCE MR imaging. © RSNA, 2017 Online supplemental material is available for this article.

