title: Automated Gleason Grading
template: project-single
picture: software/automated_gleason_grading.png
description: Automated analysis of prostate biopsies following the Gleason grading system.
groups: pathology, diag
people: Wouter Bulten, Geert Litjens, Hans Pinckaers, Thomas de Bel
bibkeys: bult19b, bult19, Bel19, Band17

The **Gleason score** is the most important prognostic marker for prostate cancer patients but suffers from significant inter-observer variability. We developed a **fully automated system using deep learning** that can grade prostate biopsies following the Gleason Grading System. The system outputs a biopsy level grade group and an overlay map showing the detected growth patterns. The algorithm is available online and can be tested by uploading prostate biopsies.

## Trying out the algorithm

Our trained system can be tried out online through the [Grand Challenge Algorithms](https://grand-challenge.org/algorithms/) platform. Please click the button below to go the algorithm. After registering for a new account, or logging in to an existing Grand Challenge account, you can request access to the algorithm. The algorithm can be ran with a minimum of one biopsy, supplied in a multiresolution tiff file. The file should at least contain levels corresponding to a 0.24 and 0.48 pixel spacing.

<a href="https://grand-challenge.org/algorithms/gleason-grading-of-prostate-biopsies/" class="btn btn-primary btn-lg">Try out the algorithm</a>

## Description of the pipeline

1. For each biopsy, a background tissue mask will be generated by deep learning-based tissue segmentation system.
2. Based on the input and a small set of target files, a CycleGAN-based normalization algorithm is trained.
2. The trained normalization algorithm is applied to all input biopsies to normalize the data.
3. Each normalized biopsy is processed by the automated Gleason grading system. The output of the system is an overlay and a set of metrics for each biopsy. The metrics include the biopsy-level grade group, the Gleason score and predicted volume percentages.

## Terms & Conditions

When submitting data to the algorithm, please take the following in to account:

1. Use of the algorithm is for research purposes only. The algorithm was trained on data from a single center, and can give the wrong diagnosis on external data.
2. A custom normalization algorithm is trained on the input data, though this cannot overcome all stain and scanner differences. To limit processing time, the CycleGAN is only trained for a limited number of epochs.
3. We currently only support .tiff files as input.
4. All input images should at least have a magnification level that corresponds to a pixel spacing of 0.48 and 0.96. The algorithm will fail if any of the input images misses this information.
5. Following the Terms & Conditions of the Grand-Challenge platform, submitted data can be used for further research projects. We assume that submitted data has been anonymized and that you, as a submitter, have the rights to submit the image.

## More information

Please refer to any of the following sources for more information:

-
-

Further questions regarding the Gleason grading system can be addressed to [member: Wouter Bulten].
